---
layout: post
title: "A:TNG Values"
date: 2014-03-10 09:43:28 +1100
comments: true
categories: 
- Values
- Mission
---

By working Agile and helping others do so we have come to value:

* **Consensus games over accountable hierarchies**  
* **Awakened teams over certified experts**  
* **Capability funding over project budgets**
* **Adaptation patterns over prescriptive frameworks**  

That is, while there is value in the items on the right, we value the items on
the left more. And while we honor the original Manifesto values, we honor these
TNG values equally.
<!-- more -->

## What do those items on the left mean?

The items on the right are familiar to us all. The items on the left have
a pleasant ring, but let's make some concrete examples to make them clear.

* **Consensus games** include [lean coffees](), [open spaces](),
  [retrospectives](), [agile
  parliament](http://agiletng.org/2014/04/02/agile-parliament/) and other ways
  for people to align understandings and make decisions together. Lean coffees
  and open spaces do the former; retros and parliaments do the latter. 

* **Awakened teams** self-organize to optimize quality, throughput and ROI
  through a process of continuous adaptation. Certificates provide a way to
  assure basic understanding of theory, but Agile self-organization is learned
  as teams experience, reflect and deliver together, not by book-learning.

* **Capability funding** means empowering teams to continuously deliver and
  improve their value streams, rather than chunking objectives and budgets
  arbitrarily into projects. It includes patterns of work from [Beyond
  Budeting](), [Beta Codex](), [Lean Software Delivery]() and [Open Book
  Management]().

* **Adaptation patterns** are a method of describing good design practices for
  team working. Similar to design patterns for software, each pattern
  describes a proven solution to a commonplace problem in a collaborative
  context. They were pioneered by Beck in his initial description of XP and
  revived by Jim Coplien and Ken Schwaber in their [ScrumPLOP]() conference.

## Where do these values come from?

Agile started with XP on the [C2
Wiki](http://www.c2.com/cgi/wiki/ExtremeProgrammingRoadmap), a high powered
but open community of professionals sharing patterns and innovations for the
common good. The Agile Alliance distilled this work into a Manifesto and added
a signup page, but C2's open community is the real reason for the global
supremacy of Agile today.

Nevertheless that all happened last century and the Manifesto is showing
its age.  It's still right on when it comes to teams, but lacks values and
principles for large scale Agile adoption. This gap has led to
[contention](http://agile.dzone.com/articles/method-wars-scrum-vs-safe) as
consultancies and certificate-mills compete to pry open corporate checkbooks
for their respective brands. 

Which is crazy. There's value in both Scrum and SAFe, and no reason to think
you can't combine elements of both along with other frameworks. The value of
frameworks isn't in their brands and certificates, nor in adopting them as
prescriptions, but in adapting the practice patterns they contain. 

Schwaber is correct in worrying about the danger of making "half a cow and
half a fish" when what we really want is dolphins. The question is, on what
basis do you go about the process of adaptation? How do you do it organically,
iteratively, and without tripping up at scale? To do that you need a clear set
of values and principles. And that's where A:TNG comes in.

A:TNG is based on the idea that SAFe, Less, DAD, APF, ETF, OBM, Beyond
Budgeting, Lean and on and on all provide useful adaptation patterns.  And
that there's a lot more to enterprise agility than all of them put together.
We've augmented the Manifesto values not as a way to make yet another brand,
but as a basis for the work of pulling these pattern languages out of all the
brands and into the open where we can really sort out what works with what.
