---
layout: post
title: "The Goose In The Bottle"
date: 2014-03-27 11:31:11 +1100
author: Peter Merel
comments: true
categories: 
---

Take a newly hatched baby goose. Poke it down the neck of an empty saki bottle
and feed it till it's grown. Without killing the goose or breaking the bottle,
how do you get the goose out of the bottle?

{% img /images/gib.png %}

<!-- more -->

## Zen Riddles 

This is what the Japanese Zen tradition calls a _koan_, a kind of riddle for
personal transformation. It has no rational answer. 

If you were to stop reading now and solve this one yourself, it might take
some sweat. You may have to travel. Consult wise people from diverse
traditions. Spend days in silent meditation. Raise children and learn from
them. Grok out.

You're a busy person, however, and this is about Agile, not Zen, so I'll just
give you the answer so we can move on.

## The Coach in the Bottle

I first read the goose koan as a young man. I puzzled over it for weeks but
then set it aside.  Who has time for a riddle with no answer? I thought it
could have no practical importance and I had no shortage of more interesting
questions to worry about.

Until, as a coach, I became a goose. 

I accepted a role transforming a business unit of the largest Australian
insurer. A year earlier I had successfully transformed an insurance BI group
of about seventy. Now I had three hundred staff stuck in silos and component
layers, with myself the sole coach charged with getting them out. 

This insurer had attempted ad-hoc Agile twice. Its first project went cowboy,
shipping 5 months late with 1200 defects and zero documentation. The second
project used Agile to fail fast, demonstrating it business case didn't stand
up. For which learning it was blamed and shamed, and its excellent
Scrum-master got handed her hat.

I naturally expect to walk into this kind of thing. A coach is only engaged
when management strikes a problem it can't solve without a coach. You expect to
walk into trouble, or else you wouldn't be there in the first place. 

Per the [seven samurai]() I set about assessing and aligning senior business
and delivery management and also technical leads per silo.  That's when I hit
the wall. People were happy to engage with me, but I was getting the same
conversation over and over. Six times in a week according to my diary.  

"I completely agree with you," they said. "Agile is great. If we could do
it properly, life would be much better. But you'll never get _them_ to do it."

They'd point out another team. I would talk to that team and _they_ would say
the same about further teams, who would point back at teams I'd already spoken
to. 

It wasn't blamestorming - it was respect for their conservative co-workers.
Each team has conservatives and progressives, and no team can change faster
than its most conservative member. The progressives had learned that through
bitter experience.

That was the bottle, and I the goose. 

## Therefore,

Grow a better gosling.

Some mornings I woke in a cold sweat. I realised we were all geese in some
way. The managers who hired me, the progressives who wanted change, but
the conservatives too. They all made up each others' bottle.

In my previous role, on a smaller scale and with sufficient executive support,
I had been able to break a bottle. But this one was too strong. I wasn't going
to kill the goose by quitting either. So now I really needed an answer ... how
did those old Zen guys get their damned goose out of their damned bottle?

There's a lovely and controversial Zen book called [The Sound of the One
Hand](http://www.amazon.com/The-Sound-One-Hand-Answers/dp/0465080782), which
poses answers to 281 Zen Koans. It offers the following for this one:

**"It's out!"**

I found that answer a little unhelpful. In fact I have yet to draw any
assistance from that book in regard to any koan. Which is to say it's a
really great zen book and I highly recommend it.

In a flash, enlightenment occurred, that experience the Zen adepts spend their
time desperately attempting to attain. Or if it wasn't enlightenment, it would
do until enlightenment came along.

_Take a baby goose, a newly hatched gosling. Feed it outside the bottle until
it's full grown. Feel your heart swell as you watch it flying away._

This is to say, don't attempt to make an enterprise become Agile. Nor a
program, nor a project, nor a team. Instead, create a new cross-functional
end-to-end feature based Agile capability for the enterprise uncompromised by
any existing ways of working. And then grow it.

Feed it a budget, requirements, and team members drawn from the progressive
people you've assessed in interviews. Form a coordination scrum of stream
leaders from the old organisation, empowered by senior management not to
change how the old organisation works, but just to support the new capability.

Let the new capability leverage the quickest dirtiest deployment pathway that
exists for hotfixing. Make them accountable for their own quality and go whole
hog on virtual environments and test-first automation. Use a DVCS to manage
integration between old and new rationally. Add  product owners focused on
maximising ROI in the backlog rather than variance to baseline.

Coach this tiny new capability to produce just the minimum amount of
documentation necessary to satisfy their own operational members. Don't call
it a goose, but something completely innocuous, "the small changes team" or
similar.

Put in place bottom-line metrics to demonstrate that the throughput, quality
and ROI of the new team far exceeds the performance of the jugged goose.
Promote and leverage their wins to gain them more requirements from the
business.

Never ask anyone to join the new capability, but let the best people do so,
backfilling the old organisation if necessary, letting it diminish otherwise.

That's how I coached. Over the course of a year, the first gosling grew
organically, splitting and splitting again. Business people saw concrete
benefit and flocked together. The coordination forum used this as a model to
create similar goslings. They grew fat and laid golden eggs ...

## The Ugly Duckling

Two years later the insurer's senior management turned up at Australia's
largest Agile conference to trumpet their wins. Still I wondered - is this a
reproducible pattern? I soon had a chance to find out. 

There's a very large bank, the twentieth largest corporation in the world.
Long before that insurance gig I'd been engaged as a coach to take a couple of
its projects Agile. I didn't use the [seven samurai]() then, just got stuck in
and went for it.

While we made progress we were stopped by unaligned senior management when
they found out what we were up to.  My coaching sponsors were none too pleased
that I hadn't addressed alignment before moving onto adoption. The
experience turned ugly and I never expected to be invited back. 

Well, never say never. Six years later I was re-engaged by the same senior
manager who'd handed me my hat. We had both learned in the interim, and he had
an ad-hoc Agile project in the online division that was struggling. 

This project was for a ground-breaking product, but it was perceived to have
under-delivered its first release with severe quality problems. I found all
manner of waste, stress, compromise and misalignment. But there was one great
advantage. This product was regarded as special. The team was already out of
the bottle.

Over the next 18 months I aligned the rest of the business unit to support the
new capability and worked with the team directly to consistently exceed their
metrics release on release. The product won a dozen external awards and the
team received the Group CIO award for best project in the bank. 

It wasn't a perfect project. There were hard yards to make.  But the
realignment of delivery pipeline, team structure and environment management
that resulted became a model to be leveraged. First within the online
program, then within its business unit, and then throughout the bank.

Sorry, but I can't resist talking about the waterfowl method here ...
comparing Agile in the bank with Aesop's [ugly duckling]() who grew up ...
and then everyone saw it as a beautiful swan ...

## Will it Zen?

In a [conversation with Alistair Cockburn]() I explained the Goose In the
Bottle pattern. He felt that whether or not it could work for the enterprise,
it was cheating the koan. How is this getting the goose out of the bottle?
Surely it is a different goose!

I wanted to point Alistair at the [laws of form]() but I didn't get time to
say that in full. I hope he won't be offended if I school him in public.  Of
course it requires only a moment's thought to realize there can never be a
real goose in a real bottle. If you're silly enough to try this with a real
gosling, it will perish long before it's old enough to poke its head out. Our
goose is always a metaphor. 

On the zen of it, the moment you hear this koan, some part of you becomes the
goose, and the koan your bottle. Like all koans, to get out you have to change
who you are. 

The bottle doesn't break - the old organisation never changes. The goose
doesn't have to be killed - neither in the bottle nor out of it. But as you
feed the goose outside more requirements and more budget and more people,
soon there is no goose left in the bottle. Nor a bottle for it to be in. 

It's out!

